docs/src/userguide/memoryviews.rst, before:

.. highlight:: cython

.. _memoryviews:

**************************
Typed Memoryviews
**************************

Typed memoryviews can be used for efficient access to buffers. It is similar to the
current buffer support, but has more features and cleaner syntax. A memoryview
can be used in any context (function parameters, module-level, cdef class attribute, etc)
and can be obtained from any object that exposes the PEP 3118 buffer interface.

.. Note:: Support is experimental and new in this release, there may be bugs!

Memoryview slices
====================

Copying
--------

Memoryview slices can be obtained as follows::

    cdef int[:, :] myslice = obj

The memoryview slice can then be efficiently indexed and sliced in GIL and nogil mode.
In GIL mode these slices can also be transposed (which gives a new memoryview slice), or
copied to a C or Fortran contiguous array::

    # This slice is C contiguous
    cdef int[:, ::1] c_contiguous_slice = myslice.copy()

    # This slice is Fortran contiguous
    cdef int[::1, :] f_contiguous_slice = myslice.copy_fortran()

    print c_contiguous_slice.is_c_contig()
    print f_contiguous_slice.is_f_contig()

The `::1` in the slice type specification indicates in which dimension the data is contiguous.
It can only be used to specify full C or Fortran contiguity.

Slices can also be copied inplace::

    cdef int[:, :, :] to_slice, from_slice
    ...

    # copy the elements in from_slice to to_slice
    to_slice[...] = from_slice

.. Note:: Copying of buffers with ``object`` as the base type is not supported yet.
          Pointer types are not at all supported yet in memoryview slices.

Indexing and Slicing
--------------------

Indexing and slicing can be done with or without the GIL. It basically works like numpy. If
indices are specified for every dimension you will get specify an element of the base type
(e.g. `int`), otherwise you will get a new view. An Ellipsis means you get consecutive slices
for every unspecified dimension::

    cdef int[:, :, :] slice = ...

    # These are all equivalent
    slice[10]
    slice[10, :, :]
    slice[10, ...]

Transposing
-----------

If all dimensions are direct (i.e., there are no indirections through pointers), then
the slice can be transposed in the same way that numpy slices can be transposed::

    cdef int[:, ::1] c_contig = ...
    cdef int[::1, :] f_contig = c_contig.T

This gives a new, transposed, view on the data.

Specifying data layout
======================

Data layout can be specified using the previously seen `::1` slice syntax, or by using any
of the constants in `cython.view`.
The concepts are as follows: there is data access and data packing. Data access means either
direct (no pointer) or indirect (pointer). Generic means you don't know, and want the compiler
Data packing means your data may be strided (e.g. after slicing it, a[::2]) or contiguous
(consecutive elements are adjacent in memory). If no specifier is given in any dimension,
the data access is assumed to be direct, and the data packing assumed to be strided.
If you don't know whether a dimension will be direct or indirect (because you got an object
with a buffer interface from some library perhaps), then you can specify the `generic` flag,
in which case it will be determined at runtime.

The flags are as follows:

cdef generic = Enum("<strided and direct or indirect>")
cdef strided = Enum("<strided and direct>") # default
cdef indirect = Enum("<strided and indirect>")
# Disable generic_contiguous, as it is a troublemaker
#cdef generic_contiguous = Enum("<contiguous and direct or indirect>")
cdef contiguous = Enum("<contiguous and direct>")
cdef indirect_contiguous = Enum("<contiguous and indirect>")

* generic - strided and direct or indirect
* strided - strided and direct (this is the default)
* indirect - strided and indirect
* contiguous - contiguous and direct
* indirect_contiguous - the list of pointers is contiguous

They can be used as follows::

    from cython cimport view

    # direct access in both dimensions, strided in the first dimension, contiguous in the last
    cdef int[:, ::view.contiguous] a

    # contiguous list of pointers to contiguous lists of ints
    cdef int[::view.indirect_contiguous, ::1] b

    # direct or indirect in the first dimension, direct in the second dimension
    # strided in both dimensions
    cdef int[::view.generic, :] c

Only the first, last or the dimension following an indirect dimension may be specified contiguous::

    # INVALID
    cdef int[::view.contiguous, ::view.indirect, :] a
    cdef int[::1, ::view.indirect, :] b

    # VALID
    cdef int[::view.indirect, ::1, :] a
    cdef int[::view.indirect, :, ::1] b
    cdef int[::view.indirect_contiguous, ::1, :]

The difference between the `contiguous` flag and the `::1` specifier is that the former specifies
contiguity for only one dimension, whereas the latter specifies contiguity for all following (Fortran) or
preceding (C) dimensions::

    cdef int[:, ::1] c_contig = ...

    # VALID
    cdef int[:, ::view.contiguous] myslice = c_contig[::2]

    # INVALID
    cdef int[:, ::1] myslice = c_contig[::2]

The former case is valid because the last dimension remains contiguous, but the first dimension
does not "follow" the last one anymore (meaning, it was strided already, but it is not C or Fortran
contiguous any longer), since it was sliced.


Memoryview objects and cython.array
===================================
These typed slices can be converted to Python objects (`cython.memoryview`), and are indexable,
slicable and transposable in the same way that the slices are. They can also be converted back to typed
slices at any time.

Cython Array
============
Whenever a slice is copied (using any of the `copy` or `copy_fortran` methods), you get a new
memoryview slice of a newly created cython.array object. This array can also be used manually,
and will automatically allocate a block of data. It can later be assigned to a C or Fortran
contiguous slice (or a strided slice). It can be used like::

    import cython

    my_array = cython.array(shape=(10, 2), itemsize=sizeof(int), format="i")
    cdef int[:, :] my_slice = my_array

It also takes an optional argument `mode` ('c' or 'fortran') and a boolean `allocate_buffer`, that indicates
whether a buffer should be allocated::

    cdef cython.array my_array = cython.array(..., mode="fortran", allocate_buffer=False)
    my_array.data = <char *> my_data_pointer

    # optionally, define a function that can deallocate the data, otherwise
    # cython.array will call free() on it
    cdef void my_callback(char *data):
        ... free data if necessary

    my_array.callback_free_data = my_callback

You can also cast pointers to arrays::

    cdef cython.array my_array = <int[:10, :2]> my_data_pointer

Again, when the array will go out of scope, it will free the data, unless you register a callback like above.
Of course, you can also immidiately assign a cython.array to a typed memoryview slice.

The arrays are indexable and slicable from Python space just like memoryview objects. If you need to do this
a lot, you're better off creating a memoryview object from your array::

    memview = cython.memoryview(my_cython_array, PyBUF_C_CONTIGUOUS)

    # OR

    cdef int[:, ::1] myslice = my_cython_array
    memview = myslice

The future
==========
In the future some functionality may be added for convenience, like

1. A numpy-like `.flat` attribute (that allows efficient iteration)
2. A numpy-like `.reshape` method
3. A method `to_numpy` which would convert a memoryview object to a NumPy object
4. Indexing with newaxis or None to introduce a new axis

Commit message:

Support memoryview(slice) -> NumPy coercion + NumPy-like attributes

docs/src/userguide/memoryviews.rst, after:

.. highlight:: cython

.. _memoryviews:

**************************
Typed Memoryviews
**************************

Typed memoryviews can be used for efficient access to buffers. It is similar to the
current buffer support, but has more features and cleaner syntax. A memoryview
can be used in any context (function parameters, module-level, cdef class attribute, etc)
and can be obtained from any object that exposes the PEP 3118 buffer interface.

.. Note:: Support is experimental and new in this release, there may be bugs!

Memoryview slices
====================

Copying
--------

Memoryview slices can be obtained as follows::

    cdef int[:, :] myslice = obj

The memoryview slice can then be efficiently indexed and sliced in GIL and nogil mode.
In GIL mode these slices can also be transposed (which gives a new memoryview slice), or
copied to a C or Fortran contiguous array::

    # This slice is C contiguous
    cdef int[:, ::1] c_contiguous_slice = myslice.copy()

    # This slice is Fortran contiguous
    cdef int[::1, :] f_contiguous_slice = myslice.copy_fortran()

    print c_contiguous_slice.is_c_contig()
    print f_contiguous_slice.is_f_contig()

The `::1` in the slice type specification indicates in which dimension the data is contiguous.
It can only be used to specify full C or Fortran contiguity.

Slices can also be copied inplace::

    cdef int[:, :, :] to_slice, from_slice
    ...

    # copy the elements in from_slice to to_slice
    to_slice[...] = from_slice

.. Note:: Copying of buffers with ``object`` as the base type is not supported yet.
          Pointer types are not at all supported yet in memoryview slices.

Indexing and Slicing
--------------------

Indexing and slicing can be done with or without the GIL. It basically works like numpy. If
indices are specified for every dimension you will get specify an element of the base type
(e.g. `int`), otherwise you will get a new view. An Ellipsis means you get consecutive slices
for every unspecified dimension::

    cdef int[:, :, :] slice = ...

    # These are all equivalent
    slice[10]
    slice[10, :, :]
    slice[10, ...]

Transposing
-----------

If all dimensions are direct (i.e., there are no indirections through pointers), then
the slice can be transposed in the same way that numpy slices can be transposed::

    cdef int[:, ::1] c_contig = ...
    cdef int[::1, :] f_contig = c_contig.T

This gives a new, transposed, view on the data.

Specifying data layout
======================

Data layout can be specified using the previously seen `::1` slice syntax, or by using any
of the constants in `cython.view`.
The concepts are as follows: there is data access and data packing. Data access means either
direct (no pointer) or indirect (pointer). Generic means you don't know, and want the compiler
Data packing means your data may be strided (e.g. after slicing it, a[::2]) or contiguous
(consecutive elements are adjacent in memory). If no specifier is given in any dimension,
the data access is assumed to be direct, and the data packing assumed to be strided.
If you don't know whether a dimension will be direct or indirect (because you got an object
with a buffer interface from some library perhaps), then you can specify the `generic` flag,
in which case it will be determined at runtime.

The flags are as follows:

cdef generic = Enum("<strided and direct or indirect>")
cdef strided = Enum("<strided and direct>") # default
cdef indirect = Enum("<strided and indirect>")
# Disable generic_contiguous, as it is a troublemaker
#cdef generic_contiguous = Enum("<contiguous and direct or indirect>")
cdef contiguous = Enum("<contiguous and direct>")
cdef indirect_contiguous = Enum("<contiguous and indirect>")

* generic - strided and direct or indirect
* strided - strided and direct (this is the default)
* indirect - strided and indirect
* contiguous - contiguous and direct
* indirect_contiguous - the list of pointers is contiguous

They can be used as follows::

    from cython cimport view

    # direct access in both dimensions, strided in the first dimension, contiguous in the last
    cdef int[:, ::view.contiguous] a

    # contiguous list of pointers to contiguous lists of ints
    cdef int[::view.indirect_contiguous, ::1] b

    # direct or indirect in the first dimension, direct in the second dimension
    # strided in both dimensions
    cdef int[::view.generic, :] c

Only the first, last or the dimension following an indirect dimension may be specified contiguous::

    # INVALID
    cdef int[::view.contiguous, ::view.indirect, :] a
    cdef int[::1, ::view.indirect, :] b

    # VALID
    cdef int[::view.indirect, ::1, :] a
    cdef int[::view.indirect, :, ::1] b
    cdef int[::view.indirect_contiguous, ::1, :]

The difference between the `contiguous` flag and the `::1` specifier is that the former specifies
contiguity for only one dimension, whereas the latter specifies contiguity for all following (Fortran) or
preceding (C) dimensions::

    cdef int[:, ::1] c_contig = ...

    # VALID
    cdef int[:, ::view.contiguous] myslice = c_contig[::2]

    # INVALID
    cdef int[:, ::1] myslice = c_contig[::2]

The former case is valid because the last dimension remains contiguous, but the first dimension
does not "follow" the last one anymore (meaning, it was strided already, but it is not C or Fortran
contiguous any longer), since it was sliced.


Memoryview objects and cython.array
===================================
These typed slices can be converted to Python objects (`cython.memoryview`), and are indexable,
slicable and transposable in the same way that the slices are. They can also be converted back to typed
slices at any time.

They have the following attributes:

    * shape
    * strides
    * suboffsets
    * ndim
    * size
    * itemsize
    * nbytes

And of course the aforementioned ``T`` attribute. These attributes have the same semantics as in NumPy_.


Cython Array
============
Whenever a slice is copied (using any of the `copy` or `copy_fortran` methods), you get a new
memoryview slice of a newly created cython.array object. This array can also be used manually,
and will automatically allocate a block of data. It can later be assigned to a C or Fortran
contiguous slice (or a strided slice). It can be used like::

    import cython

    my_array = cython.array(shape=(10, 2), itemsize=sizeof(int), format="i")
    cdef int[:, :] my_slice = my_array

It also takes an optional argument `mode` ('c' or 'fortran') and a boolean `allocate_buffer`, that indicates
whether a buffer should be allocated::

    cdef cython.array my_array = cython.array(..., mode="fortran", allocate_buffer=False)
    my_array.data = <char *> my_data_pointer

    # optionally, define a function that can deallocate the data, otherwise
    # cython.array will call free() on it
    cdef void my_callback(char *data):
        ... free data if necessary

    my_array.callback_free_data = my_callback

You can also cast pointers to arrays::

    cdef cython.array my_array = <int[:10, :2]> my_data_pointer

Again, when the array will go out of scope, it will free the data, unless you register a callback like above.
Of course, you can also immidiately assign a cython.array to a typed memoryview slice.

The arrays are indexable and slicable from Python space just like memoryview objects, and have the same
attributes as memoryview objects.

Coercion to NumPy
=================
Memoryview (and array) objects can be coerced to a NumPy ndarray, without having to copy the data. You can
e.g. do::

    cimport numpy as np
    import numpy as np

    numpy_array = np.asarray(<np.int32_t[:10, :10]> my_pointer)

Of course, you are not restricted to using NumPy's type (such as ``np.int32_t`` here), you can use any usable type.

The future
==========
In the future some functionality may be added for convenience, like

1. A numpy-like `.flat` attribute (that allows efficient iteration)
2. Indexing with newaxis or None to introduce a new axis

.. _NumPy: http://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/arrays.ndarray.html#memory-layout
