docs/src/userguide/pyrex_differences.rst, before:

.. highlight:: cython

.. _pyrex-differences:

**************************************
Differences between Cython and Pyrex
**************************************

.. warning:: 
    Both Cython and Pyrex are moving targets. It has come to the point 
    that an explicit list of all the differences between the two 
    projects would be laborious to list and track, but hopefully 
    this high-level list gives an idea of the differences that 
    are present. It should be noted that both projects make an effort
    at mutual compatibility, but Cython's goal is to be as close to 
    and complete as Python as reasonable. 


Python 3.0 Support
==================

Cython creates ``.c`` files that can be built and used with both 
Python 2.x and Python 3.x. In fact, compiling your module with 
Cython may very well be the easiest way to port code to Python 3.0. 
We are also working to make the compiler run in both Python 2.x and 3.0. 

Many Python 3 constructs are already supported by Cython. 

List/Set/Dict Comprehensions
----------------------------

Cython supports the different comprehensions defined by Python 3.0 for
lists, sets and dicts::

       [expr(x) for x in A]             # list
       {expr(x) for x in A}             # set
       {key(x) : value(x) for x in A}   # dict

Looping is optimized if ``A`` is a list, tuple or dict.  You can use
the :keyword:`for` ... :keyword:`from` syntax, too, but it is
generally preferred to use the usual :keyword:`for` ... :keyword:`in`
``range(...)`` syntax with a C run variable (e.g. ``cdef int i``).

.. note:: see :ref:`automatic-range-conversion`

Note that Cython also supports set literals starting from Python 2.3.

Keyword-only arguments
----------------------

Python functions can have keyword-only arguments listed after the ``*``
parameter and before the ``**`` parameter if any, e.g.::

    def f(a, b, *args, c, d = 42, e, **kwds):
        ...

Here ``c``, ``d`` and ``e`` cannot be passed as position arguments and must be
passed as keyword arguments. Furthermore, ``c`` and ``e`` are required keyword
arguments, since they do not have a default value.

If the parameter name after the ``*`` is omitted, the function will not accept any
extra positional arguments, e.g.::

    def g(a, b, *, c, d):
        ...

takes exactly two positional parameters and has two required keyword parameters.



Conditional expressions "x if b else y" (python 2.5)
=====================================================

Conditional expressions as described in
http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0308/::

    X if C else Y
       
Only one of ``X`` and ``Y`` is evaluated, (depending on the value of C). 

cdef inline
=============

Module level functions can now be declared inline, with the :keyword:`inline`
keyword passed on to the C compiler. These can be as fast as macros.::

    cdef inline int something_fast(int a, int b):
        return a*a + b
       
Note that class-level :keyword:`cdef` functions are handled via a virtual
function table, so the compiler won't be able to inline them in almost all
cases. 

Assignment on declaration (e.g. "cdef int spam = 5")
======================================================

In Pyrex, one must write::

    cdef int i, j, k
    i = 2
    j = 5
    k = 7
    
Now, with cython, one can write::

    cdef int i = 2, j = 5, k = 7
    
The expression on the right hand side can be arbitrarily complicated, e.g.::

    cdef int n = python_call(foo(x,y), a + b + c) - 32
       

'by' expression in for loop (e.g. "for i from 0 <= i < 10 by 2")
==================================================================
    
::

    for i from 0 <= i < 10 by 2:
        print i
       

yields::

    0
    2
    4
    6
    8

.. note:: see :ref:`automatic-range-conversion`
       

Boolean int type (e.g. it acts like a c int, but coerces to/from python as a boolean)
======================================================================================

In C, ints are used for truth values. In python, any object can be used as a
truth value (using the :meth:`__nonzero__` method), but the canonical choices
are the two boolean objects ``True`` and ``False``. The :c:type:`bint` (for
"boolean int") type is compiled to a C int, but coerces to and from
Python as booleans. The return type of comparisons and several builtins is a
:c:type:`bint` as well. This reduces the need for wrapping things in
:func:`bool()`. For example, one can write::

    def is_equal(x):
        return x == y

which would return ``1`` or ``0`` in Pyrex, but returns ``True`` or ``False`` in
Cython. One can declare variables and return values for functions to be of the
:c:type:`bint` type.  For example::

    cdef int i = x
    cdef bint b = x

The first conversion would happen via ``x.__int__()`` whereas the second would
happen via ``x.__nonzero__()``. (Actually, if ``x`` is the python object
``True`` or ``False`` then no method call is made.) 

Executable class bodies
=======================

Including a working :func:`classmethod`::

    cdef class Blah:
        def some_method(self):
            print self
        some_method = classmethod(some_method)
        a = 2*3
        print "hi", a
        
cpdef functions
=================

Cython adds a third function type on top of the usual :keyword:`def` and
:keyword:`cdef`. If a function is declared :keyword:`cpdef` it can be called
from and overridden by both extension and normal python subclasses. You can
essentially think of a :keyword:`cpdef` method as a :keyword:`cdef` method +
some extras. (That's how it's implemented at least.) First, it creates a
:keyword:`def` method that does nothing but call the underlying
:keyword:`cdef` method (and does argument unpacking/coercion if needed). At
the top of the :keyword:`cdef` method a little bit of code is added to check
to see if it's overridden.  Specifically, in pseudocode::

    if type(self) has a __dict__:
        foo = self.getattr('foo')
        if foo is not wrapper_foo:
            return foo(args)
    [cdef method body]

To detect whether or not a type has a dictionary, it just checks the
tp_dictoffset slot, which is ``NULL`` (by default) for extension types, but
non- null for instance classes. If the dictionary exists, it does a single
attribute lookup and can tell (by comparing pointers) whether or not the
returned result is actually a new function. If, and only if, it is a new
function, then the arguments packed into a tuple and the method called. This
is all very fast. A flag is set so this lookup does not occur if one calls the
method on the class directly, e.g.::

    cdef class A:
        cpdef foo(self):
            pass

    x = A()
    x.foo()  # will check to see if overridden
    A.foo(x) # will call A's implementation whether overridden or not

See :ref:`early-binding-for-speed` for explanation and usage tips. 

.. _automatic-range-conversion:

Automatic range conversion
============================

This will convert statements of the form ``for i in range(...)`` to ``for i
from ...`` when ``i`` is any cdef'd integer type, and the direction (i.e. sign
of step) can be determined. 

.. warning:: 

    This may change the semantics if the range causes
    assignment to ``i`` to overflow. Specifically, if this option is set, an error
    will be raised before the loop is entered, whereas without this option the loop
    will execute until a overflowing value is encountered. If this effects you
    change ``Cython/Compiler/Options.py`` (eventually there will be a better
    way to set this).

More friendly type casting
===========================

In Pyrex, if one types ``<int>x`` where ``x`` is a Python object, one will get
the memory address of ``x``. Likewise, if one types ``<object>i`` where ``i``
is a C int, one will get an "object" at location ``i`` in memory. This leads
to confusing results and segfaults.

In Cython ``<type>x`` will try and do a coercion (as would happen on assignment of
``x`` to a variable of type type) if exactly one of the types is a python object.
It does not stop one from casting where there is no conversion (though it will
emit a warning). If one really wants the address, cast to a ``void *`` first.

As in Pyrex ``<MyExtensionType>x`` will cast ``x`` to type :ctype:`MyExtensionType` without any
type checking. Cython supports the syntax ``<MyExtensionType?>`` to do the cast
with type checking (i.e. it will throw an error if ``x`` is not a (subclass of)
:ctype:`MyExtensionType`. 

Optional arguments in cdef/cpdef functions
============================================

Cython now supports optional arguments for :keyword:`cdef` and
:keyword:`cpdef` functions.

The syntax in the ``.pyx`` file remains as in Python, but one declares such
functions in the ``.pxd`` file by writing ``cdef foo(x=*)``. The number of
arguments may increase on subclassing, but the argument types and order must
remain the same. There is a slight performance penalty in some cases when a
cdef/cpdef function without any optional is overridden with one that does have
default argument values. 

For example, one can have the ``.pxd`` file::

    cdef class A:
        cdef foo(self)
    cdef class B(A)
        cdef foo(self, x=*)
    cdef class C(B):
        cpdef foo(self, x=*, int k=*)

with corresponding ``.pyx`` file::

    cdef class A:
        cdef foo(self):
            print "A"
    cdef class B(A)
        cdef foo(self, x=None)
            print "B", x
    cdef class C(B):
        cpdef foo(self, x=True, int k=3)
            print "C", x, k

.. note:: 

    this also demonstrates how :keyword:`cpdef` functions can override
    :keyword:`cdef` functions.

Function pointers in structs
=============================

Functions declared in :keyword:`structs` are automatically converted to
function pointers for convenience.

C++ Exception handling
=========================

:keyword:`cdef` functions can now be declared as::

    cdef int foo(...) except +
    cdef int foo(...) except +TypeError
    cdef int foo(...) except +python_error_raising_function

in which case a Python exception will be raised when a C++ error is caught.
See :ref:`wrapping-cplusplus` for more details.

Synonyms
=========

``cdef import from`` means the same thing as ``cdef extern from``

Source code encoding
======================

.. TODO: add the links to the relevent PEPs

Cython supports PEP 3120 and PEP 263, i.e. you can start your Cython source
file with an encoding comment and generally write your source code in UTF-8.
This impacts the encoding of byte strings and the conversion of unicode string
literals like ``u'abcd'`` to unicode objects.

Automatic ``typecheck``
========================

Rather than introducing a new keyword :keyword:`typecheck` as explained in the
`Pyrex docs
<http://www.cosc.canterbury.ac.nz/greg.ewing/python/Pyrex/version/Doc/Manual/special_methods.html>`_,
Cython emits a (non-spoofable and faster) typecheck whenever
:func:`isinstance` is used with an extension type as the second parameter.

From __future__ directives
==========================

Cython supports several from __future__ directives, namely ``unicode_literals`` and ``division``. 

With statements are always enabled. 

Pure Python mode
================

Cython has support for compiling ``.py`` files, and 
accepting type annotations using decorators and other
valid Python syntax. This allows the same source to 
be interpreted as straight Python, or compiled for 
optimized results. 
See http://wiki.cython.org/pure 
for more details.

Commit message:

doc note: for-from loop syntax is discouraged

docs/src/userguide/pyrex_differences.rst, after:

.. highlight:: cython

.. _pyrex-differences:

**************************************
Differences between Cython and Pyrex
**************************************

.. warning:: 
    Both Cython and Pyrex are moving targets. It has come to the point 
    that an explicit list of all the differences between the two 
    projects would be laborious to list and track, but hopefully 
    this high-level list gives an idea of the differences that 
    are present. It should be noted that both projects make an effort
    at mutual compatibility, but Cython's goal is to be as close to 
    and complete as Python as reasonable. 


Python 3.0 Support
==================

Cython creates ``.c`` files that can be built and used with both 
Python 2.x and Python 3.x. In fact, compiling your module with 
Cython may very well be the easiest way to port code to Python 3.0. 
We are also working to make the compiler run in both Python 2.x and 3.0. 

Many Python 3 constructs are already supported by Cython. 

List/Set/Dict Comprehensions
----------------------------

Cython supports the different comprehensions defined by Python 3.0 for
lists, sets and dicts::

       [expr(x) for x in A]             # list
       {expr(x) for x in A}             # set
       {key(x) : value(x) for x in A}   # dict

Looping is optimized if ``A`` is a list, tuple or dict.  You can use
the :keyword:`for` ... :keyword:`from` syntax, too, but it is
generally preferred to use the usual :keyword:`for` ... :keyword:`in`
``range(...)`` syntax with a C run variable (e.g. ``cdef int i``).

.. note:: see :ref:`automatic-range-conversion`

Note that Cython also supports set literals starting from Python 2.3.

Keyword-only arguments
----------------------

Python functions can have keyword-only arguments listed after the ``*``
parameter and before the ``**`` parameter if any, e.g.::

    def f(a, b, *args, c, d = 42, e, **kwds):
        ...

Here ``c``, ``d`` and ``e`` cannot be passed as position arguments and must be
passed as keyword arguments. Furthermore, ``c`` and ``e`` are required keyword
arguments, since they do not have a default value.

If the parameter name after the ``*`` is omitted, the function will not accept any
extra positional arguments, e.g.::

    def g(a, b, *, c, d):
        ...

takes exactly two positional parameters and has two required keyword parameters.



Conditional expressions "x if b else y" (python 2.5)
=====================================================

Conditional expressions as described in
http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0308/::

    X if C else Y
       
Only one of ``X`` and ``Y`` is evaluated, (depending on the value of C). 

cdef inline
=============

Module level functions can now be declared inline, with the :keyword:`inline`
keyword passed on to the C compiler. These can be as fast as macros.::

    cdef inline int something_fast(int a, int b):
        return a*a + b
       
Note that class-level :keyword:`cdef` functions are handled via a virtual
function table, so the compiler won't be able to inline them in almost all
cases. 

Assignment on declaration (e.g. "cdef int spam = 5")
======================================================

In Pyrex, one must write::

    cdef int i, j, k
    i = 2
    j = 5
    k = 7
    
Now, with cython, one can write::

    cdef int i = 2, j = 5, k = 7
    
The expression on the right hand side can be arbitrarily complicated, e.g.::

    cdef int n = python_call(foo(x,y), a + b + c) - 32
       

'by' expression in for loop (e.g. "for i from 0 <= i < 10 by 2")
==================================================================
    
::

    for i from 0 <= i < 10 by 2:
        print i
       

yields::

    0
    2
    4
    6
    8

.. note:: Usage of this syntax is discouraged as it is redundant with the
          normal Python :keyword:`for` loop.
          See :ref:`automatic-range-conversion`.

Boolean int type (e.g. it acts like a c int, but coerces to/from python as a boolean)
======================================================================================

In C, ints are used for truth values. In python, any object can be used as a
truth value (using the :meth:`__nonzero__` method), but the canonical choices
are the two boolean objects ``True`` and ``False``. The :c:type:`bint` (for
"boolean int") type is compiled to a C int, but coerces to and from
Python as booleans. The return type of comparisons and several builtins is a
:c:type:`bint` as well. This reduces the need for wrapping things in
:func:`bool()`. For example, one can write::

    def is_equal(x):
        return x == y

which would return ``1`` or ``0`` in Pyrex, but returns ``True`` or ``False`` in
Cython. One can declare variables and return values for functions to be of the
:c:type:`bint` type.  For example::

    cdef int i = x
    cdef bint b = x

The first conversion would happen via ``x.__int__()`` whereas the second would
happen via ``x.__nonzero__()``. (Actually, if ``x`` is the python object
``True`` or ``False`` then no method call is made.) 

Executable class bodies
=======================

Including a working :func:`classmethod`::

    cdef class Blah:
        def some_method(self):
            print self
        some_method = classmethod(some_method)
        a = 2*3
        print "hi", a
        
cpdef functions
=================

Cython adds a third function type on top of the usual :keyword:`def` and
:keyword:`cdef`. If a function is declared :keyword:`cpdef` it can be called
from and overridden by both extension and normal python subclasses. You can
essentially think of a :keyword:`cpdef` method as a :keyword:`cdef` method +
some extras. (That's how it's implemented at least.) First, it creates a
:keyword:`def` method that does nothing but call the underlying
:keyword:`cdef` method (and does argument unpacking/coercion if needed). At
the top of the :keyword:`cdef` method a little bit of code is added to check
to see if it's overridden.  Specifically, in pseudocode::

    if type(self) has a __dict__:
        foo = self.getattr('foo')
        if foo is not wrapper_foo:
            return foo(args)
    [cdef method body]

To detect whether or not a type has a dictionary, it just checks the
tp_dictoffset slot, which is ``NULL`` (by default) for extension types, but
non- null for instance classes. If the dictionary exists, it does a single
attribute lookup and can tell (by comparing pointers) whether or not the
returned result is actually a new function. If, and only if, it is a new
function, then the arguments packed into a tuple and the method called. This
is all very fast. A flag is set so this lookup does not occur if one calls the
method on the class directly, e.g.::

    cdef class A:
        cpdef foo(self):
            pass

    x = A()
    x.foo()  # will check to see if overridden
    A.foo(x) # will call A's implementation whether overridden or not

See :ref:`early-binding-for-speed` for explanation and usage tips. 

.. _automatic-range-conversion:

Automatic range conversion
============================

This will convert statements of the form ``for i in range(...)`` to ``for i
from ...`` when ``i`` is any cdef'd integer type, and the direction (i.e. sign
of step) can be determined. 

.. warning:: 

    This may change the semantics if the range causes
    assignment to ``i`` to overflow. Specifically, if this option is set, an error
    will be raised before the loop is entered, whereas without this option the loop
    will execute until a overflowing value is encountered. If this effects you
    change ``Cython/Compiler/Options.py`` (eventually there will be a better
    way to set this).

More friendly type casting
===========================

In Pyrex, if one types ``<int>x`` where ``x`` is a Python object, one will get
the memory address of ``x``. Likewise, if one types ``<object>i`` where ``i``
is a C int, one will get an "object" at location ``i`` in memory. This leads
to confusing results and segfaults.

In Cython ``<type>x`` will try and do a coercion (as would happen on assignment of
``x`` to a variable of type type) if exactly one of the types is a python object.
It does not stop one from casting where there is no conversion (though it will
emit a warning). If one really wants the address, cast to a ``void *`` first.

As in Pyrex ``<MyExtensionType>x`` will cast ``x`` to type :ctype:`MyExtensionType` without any
type checking. Cython supports the syntax ``<MyExtensionType?>`` to do the cast
with type checking (i.e. it will throw an error if ``x`` is not a (subclass of)
:ctype:`MyExtensionType`. 

Optional arguments in cdef/cpdef functions
============================================

Cython now supports optional arguments for :keyword:`cdef` and
:keyword:`cpdef` functions.

The syntax in the ``.pyx`` file remains as in Python, but one declares such
functions in the ``.pxd`` file by writing ``cdef foo(x=*)``. The number of
arguments may increase on subclassing, but the argument types and order must
remain the same. There is a slight performance penalty in some cases when a
cdef/cpdef function without any optional is overridden with one that does have
default argument values. 

For example, one can have the ``.pxd`` file::

    cdef class A:
        cdef foo(self)
    cdef class B(A)
        cdef foo(self, x=*)
    cdef class C(B):
        cpdef foo(self, x=*, int k=*)

with corresponding ``.pyx`` file::

    cdef class A:
        cdef foo(self):
            print "A"
    cdef class B(A)
        cdef foo(self, x=None)
            print "B", x
    cdef class C(B):
        cpdef foo(self, x=True, int k=3)
            print "C", x, k

.. note:: 

    this also demonstrates how :keyword:`cpdef` functions can override
    :keyword:`cdef` functions.

Function pointers in structs
=============================

Functions declared in :keyword:`structs` are automatically converted to
function pointers for convenience.

C++ Exception handling
=========================

:keyword:`cdef` functions can now be declared as::

    cdef int foo(...) except +
    cdef int foo(...) except +TypeError
    cdef int foo(...) except +python_error_raising_function

in which case a Python exception will be raised when a C++ error is caught.
See :ref:`wrapping-cplusplus` for more details.

Synonyms
=========

``cdef import from`` means the same thing as ``cdef extern from``

Source code encoding
======================

.. TODO: add the links to the relevent PEPs

Cython supports PEP 3120 and PEP 263, i.e. you can start your Cython source
file with an encoding comment and generally write your source code in UTF-8.
This impacts the encoding of byte strings and the conversion of unicode string
literals like ``u'abcd'`` to unicode objects.

Automatic ``typecheck``
========================

Rather than introducing a new keyword :keyword:`typecheck` as explained in the
`Pyrex docs
<http://www.cosc.canterbury.ac.nz/greg.ewing/python/Pyrex/version/Doc/Manual/special_methods.html>`_,
Cython emits a (non-spoofable and faster) typecheck whenever
:func:`isinstance` is used with an extension type as the second parameter.

From __future__ directives
==========================

Cython supports several from __future__ directives, namely ``unicode_literals`` and ``division``. 

With statements are always enabled. 

Pure Python mode
================

Cython has support for compiling ``.py`` files, and 
accepting type annotations using decorators and other
valid Python syntax. This allows the same source to 
be interpreted as straight Python, or compiled for 
optimized results. 
See http://wiki.cython.org/pure 
for more details.
