docs/src/userguide/wrapping_CPlusPlus.rst, before:

.. highlight:: cython

.. _wrapping-cplusplus:

********************************
Using C++ in Cython
********************************

Overview
=========

Cython v0.13 introduces native support for most of the C++ language.
This means that the previous tricks that were used to wrap C++ classes
(as described in http://wiki.cython.org/WrappingCPlusPlus_ForCython012AndLower)
are no longer needed.

Wrapping C++ classes with Cython is now much more straightforward.
This document describe in details the new way of wrapping C++ code.

What's new in Cython v0.13 about C++
---------------------------------------------------

For users of previous Cython versions, here is a brief overview of the
main new features of Cython v0.13 regarding C++ support:

* C++ objects can now be dynamically allocated with ``new`` and ``del`` keywords.
* C++ objects can be stack-allocated.
* C++ classes can be declared with the new keyword ``cppclass``.
* Templated classes are supported.
* Overloaded functions are supported.
* Overloading of C++ operators (such as operator+, operator[],...) is supported.

Procedure Overview
-------------------
The general procedure for wrapping a C++ file can now be described as follows:

* Specify C++ language in :file:`setup.py` script or locally in a source file.
* Create one or more .pxd files with ``cdef extern from`` blocks and
  (if existing) the C++ namespace name.  In these blocks,

  * declare classes as ``cdef cppclass`` blocks
  * declare public names (variables, methods and constructors)

* Write an extension modules, ``cimport`` from the .pxd file and use
  the declarations.

A simple Tutorial
==================

An example C++ API
-------------------

Here is a tiny C++ API which we will use as an example throughout this
document. Let's assume it will be in a header file called
:file:`Rectangle.h`:

.. sourcecode:: c++

    namespace shapes {
        class Rectangle {
        public:
            int x0, y0, x1, y1;
            Rectangle(int x0, int y0, int x1, int y1);
            ~Rectangle();
            int getLength();
            int getHeight();
            int getArea();
            void move(int dx, int dy);
        };
    }
    
and the implementation in the file called :file:`Rectangle.cpp`:

.. sourcecode:: c++

    #include "Rectangle.h"

    using namespace shapes;

    Rectangle::Rectangle(int X0, int Y0, int X1, int Y1)
    {
        x0 = X0;
        y0 = Y0;
        x1 = X1;
        y1 = Y1;
    }

    Rectangle::~Rectangle()
    {
    }

    int Rectangle::getLength()
    {
        return (x1 - x0);
    }

    int Rectangle::getHeight()
    {
        return (y1 - y0);
    }

    int Rectangle::getArea()
    {
        return (x1 - x0) * (y1 - y0);
    }

    void Rectangle::move(int dx, int dy)
    {
        x0 += dx;
        y0 += dy;
        x1 += dx;
        y1 += dy;
    }

This is pretty dumb, but should suffice to demonstrate the steps involved.

Specify C++ language in setup.py
---------------------------------

The best way to build Cython code from :file:`setup.py` scripts is the
``cythonize()`` function.  To make Cython generate and compile C++ code
with distutils, you just need to pass the option ``language="c++"``::

   from distutils.core import setup
   from Cython.Build import cythonize

   setup(ext_modules = cythonize(
              "rect.pyx",                 # our Cython source
              sources=["Rectangle.cpp"],  # additional source file(s)
              language="c++",             # generate C++ code
         ))

Cython will generate and compile the :file:`rect.cpp` file (from the
:file:`rect.pyx`), then it will compile :file:`Rectangle.cpp`
(implementation of the ``Rectangle`` class) and link both objects files
together into :file:`rect.so`, which you can then import in Python using
``import rect`` (if you forget to link the :file:`Rectangle.o`, you will
get missing symbols while importing the library in Python).

The options can also be passed directly from the source file, which is
often preferable.  Starting with version 0.17, Cython also allows to
pass external source files into the ``cythonize()`` command this way.
Here is a simplified setup.py file::

   from distutils.core import setup
   from Cython.Build import cythonize

   setup(
       name = "rectangleapp",
       ext_modules = cythonize('*.pyx'),
   )

And in the .pyx source file, write this into the first comment block, before
any source code, to compile it in C++ mode and link it statically against the
:file:`Rectange.cpp` code file::

   # distutils: language = c++
   # distutils: sources = Rectangle.cpp

To compile manually (e.g. using ``make``), the ``cython`` command-line
utility can be used to generate a C++ ``.cpp`` file, and then compile it
into a python extension.  C++ mode for the ``cython`` command is turned
on with the ``--cplus`` option.

Declaring a C++ class interface
--------------------------------

The procedure for wrapping a C++ class is quite similar to that for wrapping
normal C structs, with a couple of additions. Let's start here by creating the
basic ``cdef extern from`` block::

    cdef extern from "Rectangle.h" namespace "shapes":

This will make the C++ class def for Rectangle available. Note the namespace declaration.

Declare class with cdef cppclass
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Now, let's add the Rectangle class to this extern from block - just copy the
class name from Rectangle.h and adjust for Cython syntax, so now it becomes::

    cdef extern from "Rectangle.h" namespace "shapes":
        cdef cppclass Rectangle:
    
Add public attributes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We now need to declare the attributes for use on Cython::

    cdef extern from "Rectangle.h" namespace "shapes":
        cdef cppclass Rectangle:
            Rectangle(int, int, int, int)
            int x0, y0, x1, y1
            int getLength()
            int getHeight()
            int getArea()
            void move(int, int)

Declare a var with the wrapped C++ class
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Now, we use cdef to declare a var of the class with the C++ ``new`` statement::

    cdef Rectangle *rec = new Rectangle(1, 2, 3, 4)
    try:
        recLength = rec.getLength()
        ...
    finally:
        del rec     # delete heap allocated object

It's also possible to declare a stack allocated object, as long as it has
a "default" constructor::

    cdef extern from "Foo.h":
        cdef cppclass Foo:
            Foo()

    def func():
        cdef Foo foo
        ...

Note that, like C++, if the class has only one constructor and it
is a default one, it's not necessary to declare it.

Create Cython wrapper class
----------------------------

At this point, we have exposed into our pyx file's namespace the interface
of the C++ Rectangle type.  Now, we need to make this accessible from
external Python code (which is our whole point).

Common programming practice is to create a Cython extension type which
holds a C++ instance pointer as an attribute ``thisptr``, and create a bunch of
forwarding methods. So we can implement the Python extension type as::

    cdef class PyRectangle:
        cdef Rectangle *thisptr      # hold a C++ instance which we're wrapping
        def __cinit__(self, int x0, int y0, int x1, int y1):
            self.thisptr = new Rectangle(x0, y0, x1, y1)
        def __dealloc__(self):
            del self.thisptr
        def getLength(self):
            return self.thisptr.getLength()
        def getHeight(self):
            return self.thisptr.getHeight()
        def getArea(self):
            return self.thisptr.getArea()
        def move(self, dx, dy):
            self.thisptr.move(dx, dy)

And there we have it. From a Python perspective, this extension type will look
and feel just like a natively defined Rectangle class. If you want to give
attribute access, you could just implement some properties::

    property x0:
        def __get__(self): return self.thisptr.x0
        def __set__(self, x0): self.thisptr.x0 = x0
    ...


Advanced C++ features
======================

We describe here all the C++ features that were not discussed in the above tutorial.

Overloading
------------

Overloading is very simple. Just declare the method with different parameters
and use any of them::

    cdef extern from "Foo.h":
        cdef cppclass Foo:
            Foo(int)
            Foo(bool)
            Foo(int, bool)
            Foo(int, int)

Overloading operators
----------------------

Cython uses C++ for overloading operators::

    cdef extern from "foo.h":
        cdef cppclass Foo:
            Foo()
            Foo* operator+(Foo*)
            Foo* operator-(Foo)
            int operator*(Foo*)
            int operator/(int)

    cdef Foo* foo = new Foo()
    cdef int x

    cdef Foo* foo2 = foo[0] + foo
    foo2 = foo[0] - foo[0]

    x = foo[0] * foo2
    x = foo[0] / 1

    cdef Foo f
    foo = f + &f
    foo2 = f - f

    del foo, foo2

Nested class declarations
--------------------------
C++ allows nested class declaration. Class declarations can also be
nested in Cython::

    cdef extern from "<vector>" namespace "std":
        cdef cppclass vector[T]:
            cppclass iterator:
                T operator*()
                iterator operator++()
                bint operator==(iterator)
                bint operator!=(iterator)
            vector()
            void push_back(T&)
            T& operator[](int)
            T& at(int)
            iterator begin()
            iterator end()
            
    cdef vector[int].iterator iter  #iter is declared as being of type vector<int>::iterator
            
Note that the nested class is declared with a ``cppclass`` but without a ``cdef``.

C++ operators not compatible with Python syntax
------------------------------------------------

Cython try to keep a syntax as close as possible to standard Python.
Because of this, certain C++ operators, like the preincrement ``++foo``
or the dereferencing operator ``*foo`` cannot be used with the same
syntax as C++. Cython provides functions replacing these operators in
a special module ``cython.operator``. The functions provided are:

* ``cython.operator.dereference`` for dereferencing. ``dereference(foo)``
  will produce the C++ code ``*(foo)``
* ``cython.operator.preincrement`` for pre-incrementation. ``preincrement(foo)``
  will produce the C++ code ``++(foo)``
* ...

These functions need to be cimported. Of course, one can use a
``from ... cimport ... as`` to have shorter and more readable functions.
For example: ``from cython.operator cimport dereference as deref``.

Templates
----------

Cython uses a bracket syntax for templating. A simple example for wrapping C++ vector::

    # import dereference and increment operators
    from cython.operator cimport dereference as deref, preincrement as inc

    cdef extern from "<vector>" namespace "std":
        cdef cppclass vector[T]:
            cppclass iterator:
                T operator*()
                iterator operator++()
                bint operator==(iterator)
                bint operator!=(iterator)
            vector()
            void push_back(T&)
            T& operator[](int)
            T& at(int)
            iterator begin()
            iterator end()

    cdef vector[int] *v = new vector[int]()
    cdef int i
    for i in range(10):
        v.push_back(i)

    cdef vector[int].iterator it = v.begin()
    while it != v.end():
        print deref(it)
        inc(it)

    del v

Multiple template parameters can be defined as a list, such as [T, U, V]
or [int, bool, char].

Standard library
-----------------

Most of the containers of the C++ Standard Library have been declared
in pxd files located in ``/Cython/Includes/libcpp``.  These containers
are: deque, list, map,  pair,  queue,  set,  stack,  vector.

For example::

    from libcpp.vector cimport vector

    cdef vector[int] vect
    cdef int i
    for i in range(10):
        vect.push_back(i)
    for i in range(10):
        print vect[i]
        
The pxd files in ``/Cython/Includes/libcpp`` also work as good examples on
how to declare C++ classes.

Exceptions
-----------

Cython cannot throw C++ exceptions, or catch them with a try-except statement,
but it is possible to declare a function as potentially raising an C++
exception and converting it into a Python exception. For example, ::

    cdef extern from "some_file.h":
        cdef int foo() except +

This will translate try and the C++ error into an appropriate Python exception.
The translation is performed according to the following table
(the ``std::`` prefix is omitted from the C++ identifiers):

+-----------------------+---------------------+
| C++                   | Python              |
+=======================+=====================+
| ``bad_alloc``         | ``MemoryError``     |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``bad_cast``          | ``TypeError``       |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``domain_error``      | ``ValueError``      |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``invalid_argument``  | ``ValueError``      |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``ios_base::failure`` | ``IOError``         |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``out_of_range``      | ``IndexError``      |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``overflow_error``    | ``OverflowError``   |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``range_error``       | ``ArithmeticError`` |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``underflow_error``   | ``ArithmeticError`` |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| (all others)          | ``RuntimeError``    |
+-----------------------+---------------------+

The ``what()`` message, if any, is preserved. Note that a C++
``ios_base_failure`` can denote EOF, but does not carry enough information
for Cython to discern that, so watch out with exception masks on IO streams. ::

    cdef int bar() except +MemoryError

This will catch any C++ error and raise a Python MemoryError in its place.
(Any Python exception is valid here.) ::

    cdef int raise_py_error()
    cdef int something_dangerous() except +raise_py_error

If something_dangerous raises a C++ exception then raise_py_error will be
called, which allows one to do custom C++ to Python error "translations." If
raise_py_error does not actually raise an exception a RuntimeError will be
raised.

Static member method
--------------------

If the Rectangle class has a static member:

.. sourcecode:: c++

    namespace shapes {
        class Rectangle {
        ...
        public:
            static void do_something();

        };
    }

you can declare it as a function living in the class namespace, i.e.::

    cdef extern from "Rectangle.h" namespace "shapes::Rectangle":
        void do_something()


Caveats and Limitations
========================

Access to C-only functions
---------------------------

Whenever generating C++ code, Cython generates declarations of and calls
to functions assuming these functions are C++ (ie, not declared as extern "C"
{...} . This is ok if the C functions have C++ entry points, but if they're C
only, you will hit a roadblock. If you have a C++ Cython module needing
to make calls to pure-C functions, you will need to write a small C++ shim
module which:

* includes the needed C headers in an extern "C" block
* contains minimal forwarding functions in C++, each of which calls the
  respective pure-C function 

Inherited C++ methods
----------------------

If you have a class ``Foo`` with a child class ``Bar``, and ``Foo`` has a
method :meth:`fred`, then you'll have to cast to access this method from
``Bar`` objects.
For example::

    cdef class MyClass:
        Bar *b
        ...
        def myfunc(self):
            ...
            b.fred()   # wrong, won't work
            (<Foo *>(self.b)).fred() # should work, Cython now thinks it's a 'Foo'

It might take some experimenting by others (you?) to find the most elegant
ways of handling this issue.

Declaring/Using References
---------------------------

Question: How do you declare and call a function that takes a reference as an argument?

C++ left-values
----------------

C++ allows functions returning a reference to be left-values.  This is currently
not supported in Cython. ``cython.operator.dereference(foo)`` is also not
considered a left-value.

Commit message:

doc paragraph on properly handling exceptions from C++ constructors

docs/src/userguide/wrapping_CPlusPlus.rst, after:

.. highlight:: cython

.. _wrapping-cplusplus:

********************************
Using C++ in Cython
********************************

Overview
=========

Cython v0.13 introduces native support for most of the C++ language.
This means that the previous tricks that were used to wrap C++ classes
(as described in http://wiki.cython.org/WrappingCPlusPlus_ForCython012AndLower)
are no longer needed.

Wrapping C++ classes with Cython is now much more straightforward.
This document describe in details the new way of wrapping C++ code.

What's new in Cython v0.13 about C++
---------------------------------------------------

For users of previous Cython versions, here is a brief overview of the
main new features of Cython v0.13 regarding C++ support:

* C++ objects can now be dynamically allocated with ``new`` and ``del`` keywords.
* C++ objects can be stack-allocated.
* C++ classes can be declared with the new keyword ``cppclass``.
* Templated classes are supported.
* Overloaded functions are supported.
* Overloading of C++ operators (such as operator+, operator[],...) is supported.

Procedure Overview
-------------------
The general procedure for wrapping a C++ file can now be described as follows:

* Specify C++ language in :file:`setup.py` script or locally in a source file.
* Create one or more .pxd files with ``cdef extern from`` blocks and
  (if existing) the C++ namespace name.  In these blocks,

  * declare classes as ``cdef cppclass`` blocks
  * declare public names (variables, methods and constructors)

* Write an extension modules, ``cimport`` from the .pxd file and use
  the declarations.

A simple Tutorial
==================

An example C++ API
-------------------

Here is a tiny C++ API which we will use as an example throughout this
document. Let's assume it will be in a header file called
:file:`Rectangle.h`:

.. sourcecode:: c++

    namespace shapes {
        class Rectangle {
        public:
            int x0, y0, x1, y1;
            Rectangle(int x0, int y0, int x1, int y1);
            ~Rectangle();
            int getLength();
            int getHeight();
            int getArea();
            void move(int dx, int dy);
        };
    }
    
and the implementation in the file called :file:`Rectangle.cpp`:

.. sourcecode:: c++

    #include "Rectangle.h"

    using namespace shapes;

    Rectangle::Rectangle(int X0, int Y0, int X1, int Y1)
    {
        x0 = X0;
        y0 = Y0;
        x1 = X1;
        y1 = Y1;
    }

    Rectangle::~Rectangle()
    {
    }

    int Rectangle::getLength()
    {
        return (x1 - x0);
    }

    int Rectangle::getHeight()
    {
        return (y1 - y0);
    }

    int Rectangle::getArea()
    {
        return (x1 - x0) * (y1 - y0);
    }

    void Rectangle::move(int dx, int dy)
    {
        x0 += dx;
        y0 += dy;
        x1 += dx;
        y1 += dy;
    }

This is pretty dumb, but should suffice to demonstrate the steps involved.

Specify C++ language in setup.py
---------------------------------

The best way to build Cython code from :file:`setup.py` scripts is the
``cythonize()`` function.  To make Cython generate and compile C++ code
with distutils, you just need to pass the option ``language="c++"``::

   from distutils.core import setup
   from Cython.Build import cythonize

   setup(ext_modules = cythonize(
              "rect.pyx",                 # our Cython source
              sources=["Rectangle.cpp"],  # additional source file(s)
              language="c++",             # generate C++ code
         ))

Cython will generate and compile the :file:`rect.cpp` file (from the
:file:`rect.pyx`), then it will compile :file:`Rectangle.cpp`
(implementation of the ``Rectangle`` class) and link both objects files
together into :file:`rect.so`, which you can then import in Python using
``import rect`` (if you forget to link the :file:`Rectangle.o`, you will
get missing symbols while importing the library in Python).

The options can also be passed directly from the source file, which is
often preferable.  Starting with version 0.17, Cython also allows to
pass external source files into the ``cythonize()`` command this way.
Here is a simplified setup.py file::

   from distutils.core import setup
   from Cython.Build import cythonize

   setup(
       name = "rectangleapp",
       ext_modules = cythonize('*.pyx'),
   )

And in the .pyx source file, write this into the first comment block, before
any source code, to compile it in C++ mode and link it statically against the
:file:`Rectange.cpp` code file::

   # distutils: language = c++
   # distutils: sources = Rectangle.cpp

To compile manually (e.g. using ``make``), the ``cython`` command-line
utility can be used to generate a C++ ``.cpp`` file, and then compile it
into a python extension.  C++ mode for the ``cython`` command is turned
on with the ``--cplus`` option.

Declaring a C++ class interface
--------------------------------

The procedure for wrapping a C++ class is quite similar to that for wrapping
normal C structs, with a couple of additions. Let's start here by creating the
basic ``cdef extern from`` block::

    cdef extern from "Rectangle.h" namespace "shapes":

This will make the C++ class def for Rectangle available. Note the namespace declaration.

Declare class with cdef cppclass
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Now, let's add the Rectangle class to this extern from block - just copy the
class name from Rectangle.h and adjust for Cython syntax, so now it becomes::

    cdef extern from "Rectangle.h" namespace "shapes":
        cdef cppclass Rectangle:
    
Add public attributes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We now need to declare the attributes and methods for use on Cython::

    cdef extern from "Rectangle.h" namespace "shapes":
        cdef cppclass Rectangle:
            Rectangle(int, int, int, int) except +
            int x0, y0, x1, y1
            int getLength()
            int getHeight()
            int getArea()
            void move(int, int)

Note that the constructor is declared as "except +".  If the C++ code or
the initial memory allocation raises an exception due to a failure, this
will let Cython safely raise an appropriate Python exception instead
(see below).  Without this declaration, C++ exceptions originating from
the constructor will not be handled by Cython.

Declare a var with the wrapped C++ class
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Now, we use cdef to declare a var of the class with the C++ ``new`` statement::

    cdef Rectangle *rec = new Rectangle(1, 2, 3, 4)
    try:
        recLength = rec.getLength()
        ...
    finally:
        del rec     # delete heap allocated object

It's also possible to declare a stack allocated object, as long as it has
a "default" constructor::

    cdef extern from "Foo.h":
        cdef cppclass Foo:
            Foo()

    def func():
        cdef Foo foo
        ...

Note that, like C++, if the class has only one constructor and it
is a default one, it's not necessary to declare it.

Create Cython wrapper class
----------------------------

At this point, we have exposed into our pyx file's namespace the interface
of the C++ Rectangle type.  Now, we need to make this accessible from
external Python code (which is our whole point).

Common programming practice is to create a Cython extension type which
holds a C++ instance pointer as an attribute ``thisptr``, and create a bunch of
forwarding methods. So we can implement the Python extension type as::

    cdef class PyRectangle:
        cdef Rectangle *thisptr      # hold a C++ instance which we're wrapping
        def __cinit__(self, int x0, int y0, int x1, int y1):
            self.thisptr = new Rectangle(x0, y0, x1, y1)
        def __dealloc__(self):
            del self.thisptr
        def getLength(self):
            return self.thisptr.getLength()
        def getHeight(self):
            return self.thisptr.getHeight()
        def getArea(self):
            return self.thisptr.getArea()
        def move(self, dx, dy):
            self.thisptr.move(dx, dy)

And there we have it. From a Python perspective, this extension type will look
and feel just like a natively defined Rectangle class. If you want to give
attribute access, you could just implement some properties::

    property x0:
        def __get__(self): return self.thisptr.x0
        def __set__(self, x0): self.thisptr.x0 = x0
    ...


Advanced C++ features
======================

We describe here all the C++ features that were not discussed in the above tutorial.

Overloading
------------

Overloading is very simple. Just declare the method with different parameters
and use any of them::

    cdef extern from "Foo.h":
        cdef cppclass Foo:
            Foo(int)
            Foo(bool)
            Foo(int, bool)
            Foo(int, int)

Overloading operators
----------------------

Cython uses C++ for overloading operators::

    cdef extern from "foo.h":
        cdef cppclass Foo:
            Foo()
            Foo* operator+(Foo*)
            Foo* operator-(Foo)
            int operator*(Foo*)
            int operator/(int)

    cdef Foo* foo = new Foo()
    cdef int x

    cdef Foo* foo2 = foo[0] + foo
    foo2 = foo[0] - foo[0]

    x = foo[0] * foo2
    x = foo[0] / 1

    cdef Foo f
    foo = f + &f
    foo2 = f - f

    del foo, foo2

Nested class declarations
--------------------------
C++ allows nested class declaration. Class declarations can also be
nested in Cython::

    cdef extern from "<vector>" namespace "std":
        cdef cppclass vector[T]:
            cppclass iterator:
                T operator*()
                iterator operator++()
                bint operator==(iterator)
                bint operator!=(iterator)
            vector()
            void push_back(T&)
            T& operator[](int)
            T& at(int)
            iterator begin()
            iterator end()
            
    cdef vector[int].iterator iter  #iter is declared as being of type vector<int>::iterator
            
Note that the nested class is declared with a ``cppclass`` but without a ``cdef``.

C++ operators not compatible with Python syntax
------------------------------------------------

Cython try to keep a syntax as close as possible to standard Python.
Because of this, certain C++ operators, like the preincrement ``++foo``
or the dereferencing operator ``*foo`` cannot be used with the same
syntax as C++. Cython provides functions replacing these operators in
a special module ``cython.operator``. The functions provided are:

* ``cython.operator.dereference`` for dereferencing. ``dereference(foo)``
  will produce the C++ code ``*(foo)``
* ``cython.operator.preincrement`` for pre-incrementation. ``preincrement(foo)``
  will produce the C++ code ``++(foo)``
* ...

These functions need to be cimported. Of course, one can use a
``from ... cimport ... as`` to have shorter and more readable functions.
For example: ``from cython.operator cimport dereference as deref``.

Templates
----------

Cython uses a bracket syntax for templating. A simple example for wrapping C++ vector::

    # import dereference and increment operators
    from cython.operator cimport dereference as deref, preincrement as inc

    cdef extern from "<vector>" namespace "std":
        cdef cppclass vector[T]:
            cppclass iterator:
                T operator*()
                iterator operator++()
                bint operator==(iterator)
                bint operator!=(iterator)
            vector()
            void push_back(T&)
            T& operator[](int)
            T& at(int)
            iterator begin()
            iterator end()

    cdef vector[int] *v = new vector[int]()
    cdef int i
    for i in range(10):
        v.push_back(i)

    cdef vector[int].iterator it = v.begin()
    while it != v.end():
        print deref(it)
        inc(it)

    del v

Multiple template parameters can be defined as a list, such as [T, U, V]
or [int, bool, char].

Standard library
-----------------

Most of the containers of the C++ Standard Library have been declared
in pxd files located in ``/Cython/Includes/libcpp``.  These containers
are: deque, list, map,  pair,  queue,  set,  stack,  vector.

For example::

    from libcpp.vector cimport vector

    cdef vector[int] vect
    cdef int i
    for i in range(10):
        vect.push_back(i)
    for i in range(10):
        print vect[i]
        
The pxd files in ``/Cython/Includes/libcpp`` also work as good examples on
how to declare C++ classes.

Exceptions
-----------

Cython cannot throw C++ exceptions, or catch them with a try-except statement,
but it is possible to declare a function as potentially raising an C++
exception and converting it into a Python exception. For example, ::

    cdef extern from "some_file.h":
        cdef int foo() except +

This will translate try and the C++ error into an appropriate Python exception.
The translation is performed according to the following table
(the ``std::`` prefix is omitted from the C++ identifiers):

+-----------------------+---------------------+
| C++                   | Python              |
+=======================+=====================+
| ``bad_alloc``         | ``MemoryError``     |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``bad_cast``          | ``TypeError``       |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``domain_error``      | ``ValueError``      |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``invalid_argument``  | ``ValueError``      |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``ios_base::failure`` | ``IOError``         |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``out_of_range``      | ``IndexError``      |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``overflow_error``    | ``OverflowError``   |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``range_error``       | ``ArithmeticError`` |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| ``underflow_error``   | ``ArithmeticError`` |
+-----------------------+---------------------+
| (all others)          | ``RuntimeError``    |
+-----------------------+---------------------+

The ``what()`` message, if any, is preserved. Note that a C++
``ios_base_failure`` can denote EOF, but does not carry enough information
for Cython to discern that, so watch out with exception masks on IO streams. ::

    cdef int bar() except +MemoryError

This will catch any C++ error and raise a Python MemoryError in its place.
(Any Python exception is valid here.) ::

    cdef int raise_py_error()
    cdef int something_dangerous() except +raise_py_error

If something_dangerous raises a C++ exception then raise_py_error will be
called, which allows one to do custom C++ to Python error "translations." If
raise_py_error does not actually raise an exception a RuntimeError will be
raised.

Static member method
--------------------

If the Rectangle class has a static member:

.. sourcecode:: c++

    namespace shapes {
        class Rectangle {
        ...
        public:
            static void do_something();

        };
    }

you can declare it as a function living in the class namespace, i.e.::

    cdef extern from "Rectangle.h" namespace "shapes::Rectangle":
        void do_something()


Caveats and Limitations
========================

Access to C-only functions
---------------------------

Whenever generating C++ code, Cython generates declarations of and calls
to functions assuming these functions are C++ (ie, not declared as extern "C"
{...} . This is ok if the C functions have C++ entry points, but if they're C
only, you will hit a roadblock. If you have a C++ Cython module needing
to make calls to pure-C functions, you will need to write a small C++ shim
module which:

* includes the needed C headers in an extern "C" block
* contains minimal forwarding functions in C++, each of which calls the
  respective pure-C function 

Inherited C++ methods
----------------------

If you have a class ``Foo`` with a child class ``Bar``, and ``Foo`` has a
method :meth:`fred`, then you'll have to cast to access this method from
``Bar`` objects.
For example::

    cdef class MyClass:
        Bar *b
        ...
        def myfunc(self):
            ...
            b.fred()   # wrong, won't work
            (<Foo *>(self.b)).fred() # should work, Cython now thinks it's a 'Foo'

It might take some experimenting by others (you?) to find the most elegant
ways of handling this issue.

Declaring/Using References
---------------------------

Question: How do you declare and call a function that takes a reference as an argument?

C++ left-values
----------------

C++ allows functions returning a reference to be left-values.  This is currently
not supported in Cython. ``cython.operator.dereference(foo)`` is also not
considered a left-value.
